Title: 2.2 Release Notes | MAAS
table_of_contents: True


**Historical release notes:** [2.2][2.2-release-notes] | [2.1][2.1-release-notes] | [2.0][2.0-release-notes]


# 2.2 Release Notes

## Important announcements

### Migrating MAAS L3 to L2 spaces

MAAS 2.2 has changed the definition of spaces from a Layer 3 concept to a Layer
2 concept.

The spaces definition in MAAS (first introduced in MAAS 1.9) is "a set of
subnets that can mutually communicate". The assumption is that these spaces can
route to each other, and have appropriate firewall rules for their purposes.
(For example, a dmz space might contain subnets with internet access, and a
storage space might contain subnets that can access the same storage networks.)
Juju uses the current definition in order to ensure that deployed applications
have access to networks appropriate for the services they provide.

The current definition of spaces as a L3 concept is problematic, in that
sometimes Juju wants to deploy applications that themselves create a Layer 3
subnet. Therefore, it was decided that the concept of spaces will be pushed
down a layer (to apply to VLANs in MAAS).

With spaces as a Layer 2 concept, it is is now "a set of VLANs whose subnets
can mutually communicate".

As such, starting from MAAS 2.2b1 :

- VLANs will gain a 'space' reference, and subnets will have their spaces
  migrated to the VLANs they are on. On upgrades, if two subnets on the same
  VLAN are in different spaces, the most recently created space will be used for
  both.

- Spaces will become optional. Fresh installs will not have a default space
  (e.g. space-0). On upgrades, if only the default space (space-0) exists, it
  will be removed.

The following API changes will occur in MAAS 2.2 :

- Editing a subnet's space will no longer be possible (breaks backwards
  compatibility). Spaces must now be edited each VLAN.

- For backward compatibility, the subnets endpoint will present the underlying
  VLAN’s space.

Recommended actions for MAAS administrators prior to upgrading to MAAS 2.2 :

- Ensure that no two subnets in the same VLAN are in different spaces, so that
  the upgrade path migrates the expected space to the VLAN.

- Ensure that each VLAN with an assigned space will contain subnets which can
  mutually communicate with other subnets whose VLAN is in the same space. This
  will allow backward compatibility with Juju charms which use the Layer 3
  definition of spaces.[2]

NOTE: Please note that not breakage is expected, provided that most people are
not using spaces. For those who we know are, they are using them in a
compatible way. If you experience some type of issue, please contact us.


## Major new features

### DHCP Relay support

The ability to model the usage of DHCP relays in your networking configuration
has been added to MAAS. The allows an administrator to identify which VLANs
will be relayed through another VLAN running a MAAS DHCP server. This will
configure the MAAS DHCP server running on the primary and/or secondary rack
controller to include the shared network statement for that VLAN. Note: MAAS
does not run a DHCP relay service, it is up to the administrator to configure
the DHCP relay service on the VLAN and point it at the primary and/or secondary
rack controller running the MAAS DHCP.

### Unmanaged subnets

In MAAS 2.0, the concept of a “static range” (a specific range of addresses in
which MAAS was allowed to freely allocate addresses from) was removed from
MAAS, in favor of the idea that MAAS managing entire subnets. As such, the only
way to tell MAAS to not allocate certain sections of a subnet is to add a
reserved IP range.

Starting from MAAS 2.2b1, however, MAAS enhances this functionality by
introducing a new concept, called unamanged subnets. Setting a Subnet in MAAS
as unmanaged, allows administrators to prevent MAAS from using that subnet for
automatic IP assignment. In other words, it is a way to tell MAAS that it knows
about a subnet but that it shouldn’t use it. 

### MAAS is now responsive

For all of those users that use (or would like to use) MAAS web UI from their
Phone or Tablet, will now have a better user experience, provided that starting
from 2.2b1, MAAS is now responsive. 

Phone or Table users will see a new slick design for those devices. Thanks for
the Ubuntu Web team for putting the effort into making MAAS look great in
smaller devices.


## Known issues and workarounds

Cannot add a device from the dashboard
https://bugs.launchpad.net/maas/+bug/1659959

Cannot add a device with parent from the dashboard


<!-- LINKS -->

[2.2-release-notes]: 2.2-release-notes.md
[2.1-release-notes]: 2.1-release-notes.md
[2.0-release-notes]: 2.0-release-notes.md
