Title: Networking
table_of_contents: True

# Networking

MAAS 1.9 adds support for the modelling of a wide variety of networking
concepts and configurations.

## Networking Concepts

At a high level, MAAS supports the following networking concepts:

### Fabrics

A fabric is a set of interconnected VLANs that are capable of mutual
communication. A fabric can be thought of as a logical grouping in which VLANs
can be considered unique.

For example, a distributed network may have a fabric in London containing VLAN
100, while a separate fabric in San Francisco may contain a VLAN 100, whose
attached subnets are completely different and unrelated.

A "Default Fabric" is created when MAAS is installed (or upgraded).

### Subnets

A subnet is a "layer 3" network defined by a particular network prefix, plus a
network mask length (in bits). This notation is also referred to as a *CIDR*.

MAAS supports IPv4 and IPv6 subnets.

Examples:

```no-highlight
10.0.0.0/8
172.16.0.0/12
192.168.0.0/16
2001:db8:4d41:4153::/64
```

Subnets can be annotated with a descriptive name, their default gateway,
and/or their DNS server(s).

A subnet can be in a single space.

Subnets are considered managed if a cluster interface specifies the cluster
network range.

### VLANs

VLANs (Virtual LANs) are a common way to create logically separate networks
using the same physical infrastructure.

Managed switches can assign VLANs to each port in either a "tagged" or an
"untagged" manner. A VLAN is said to be "untagged" on a particular port when
it is the default VLAN for that port, and requires no special configuration in
order to access.

"Tagged" VLANs (traditionally used by network administrators in order to
aggregate multiple networks over inter-switch "trunk" lines) can also be used
with nodes in MAAS. That is, if a switch port is configured such that "tagged"
VLAN frames can be sent and received by a MAAS node, that MAAS node can be
configured to automatically bring up VLAN interfaces, so that the deployed
node can make use of them.

A "Default VLAN" is created for every Fabric, to which every new VLAN-aware
object in the fabric will be associated to by default (unless otherwise
specified).

### Spaces

A Space is a logical grouping of subnets that should be able to communicate
with each other. Subnets within each space need not belong to the same fabric.
For example, you may have a "DMZ" space in both your London and San Francisco
fabrics, and a "Storage" space to indicate subnets attached to your storage
network.

A "space-0" is created when MAAS is installed (or upgraded), which every
subnet will belong to by default (unless otherwise specified).

### Interfaces

**Physical**

After a node is commissioned, MAAS discovers its physical interfaces. In
addition, devices are created with physical interfaces.

Prior to deployment, a MAAS administrator can specify additional interfaces to
be configured on the node, including one or more of the below types.

**Bond**

A bond interface is capable of aggregating two or more physical interfaces
into a single logical interface. Bonds can be used in conjunction with a
managed switch (using Link Aggregation and Control Protocol, or LACP), or
independently (software bonds).

**VLAN**

A VLAN interface can be used to connect to a tagged VLAN, if the switch port
the node is connected to is authorized to access it.

**Unknown**

Unknown interfaces cannot be created by users.

Sometimes, *unknown* interfaces are discovered by MAAS. (For example, when
MAAS learns of a new DHCP lease that is not associated with any known node or
device.)

## How to Configure Nodes for Networking

### Creating a Bond Interface

Use the `node-interfaces create-bond` API to create a bond. For example:

```bash
maas admin node-interfaces create-bond node-d83ce230-4b50-11e5-a267-00163eb185eb name=bond0 vlan=0 parents=30 parents=31 mac_address=00:50:56:2b:60:53
```

Will produce output similar to the following:

```yaml
    Success.
    Machine-readable output follows:
    {
        "name": "bond0",
        "links": [],
        "tags": [],
        "vlan": {
            "id": 0,
            "resource_uri": "/MAAS/api/1.0/fabrics/0/vlans/0/",
            "name": "Default VLAN",
            "vid": 0,
            "fabric": "fabric-0"
        },
        "enabled": true,
        "id": 41,
        "parents": [
            "eth0",
            "eth1"
        ],
        "mac_address": "00:50:56:2b:60:53",
        "type": "bond",
        "children": [],
        "resource_uri": "/MAAS/api/1.0/nodes/node-d83ce230-4b50-11e5-a267-00163eb185eb/interfaces/41/"
    }
```

Note that in the example above, the bond contains two interfaces because the
`parents` parameter was specified twice, such as `parents=30 parents=31`.

### Creating a VLAN Interface

To create a VLAN interface, use the `node-interfaces create-vlan` API.

Be aware that the `vlan` paremeter does not indicate a VLAN ID that
corresponds to the VLAN tag. You must first create the VLAN, and then
associate it with the interface. For example:

```bash
maas admin vlans create 0 name="Storage network" vid=100
```
The output will look similar to the following:

```bash
    Success.
    Machine-readable output follows:
    {
        "id": 1,
        "resource_uri": "/MAAS/api/1.0/fabrics/0/vlans/1/",
        "name": "Storage network",
        "vid": 100,
        "fabric": "fabric-0"
    }
```

Note that the `0` in the command above indicates the `fabric_id`. If you have
not defined any additional fabrics, the `fabric_id` of the default fabric will
be `0`.

Now that a VLAN is created, it may be associated with a new interface:

```bash
maas admin node-interfaces create-vlan node-d83ce230-4b50-11e5-a267-00163eb185eb vlan=1 parent=30
```

With the following output:

```yaml
    Success.
    Machine-readable output follows:
    {
        "name": "eth0.100",
        "links": [],
        "tags": [],
        "vlan": {
            "id": 1,
            "resource_uri": "/MAAS/api/1.0/fabrics/0/vlans/1/",
            "name": "Storage network",
            "vid": 100,
            "fabric": "fabric-0"
        },
        "enabled": true,
        "id": 44,
        "parents": [
            "eth0"
        ],
        "mac_address": "00:50:56:2b:60:53",
        "type": "vlan",
        "children": [],
        "resource_uri": "/MAAS/api/1.0/nodes/node-d83ce230-4b50-11e5-a267-00163eb185eb/interfaces/44/"
    }
```

### Deleting an Interface

To delete an interface, use the `node-interface delete` API. For example:

```bash
maas admin node-interface delete node-d83ce230-4b50-11e5-a267-00163eb185eb 41
```
The output will report `Success.`
